2. Vasculature Flow Model
We begin, in this section, by describing the underly-
ing physics-based vascular model that governs the way
that the vascular structure is generated. Specifically, we
discuss the flow and radii constraints of a branch in the
vascular structure. Additionally, we present equations
to calculate the reduced resistance as well as the pres-
sure drop along a branch in the vascular structure. The
flow and radii constraints, as well as the reduced resis-
tance equations, are used to determine the radii of the
branches in the generated vascular structure. The equa-
tions and constraints presented here will be used in later
sections when developing the iterative vascular genera-
tion.
Two flow constraints in a vascular network are of
particular importance for the simulation: (i) Conserva-
tion of flow, under which the flow entering a bifurca-
tion point through the parent Q parent must equal the total
flow leaving a bifurcation point via the ‘left’ and ‘right’
child branches, Q le f t and Q right , i.e.
Q parent = Q le f t + Q right . (1)
(ii) The flow into each terminal node Qterm must be the
same2 and equal to the perfusion flow Q per f at the root
of the tree divided by the total number of terminal nodes
N, i.e.
Qterm = Q per f /N. (2)
The radius of the parent branch r parent is related to the
radii of its two children, rle f t and r right , as follows
r γ
parent = r γ
le f t + r γ
right (3)
with γ set between 2.55 and 3 [20, 23]. The flow re-
sistance Ri induced along a branch i with radius r i and
length Li is
Ri = 8ηL i
πr 4
i
(4)
where η is the viscosity of the fluid, which is assumed
constant in this work for simplicity. The reduced re-
sistance R ∗ for a terminal branch3 term is obtained by
substituting r = 1 in (4),
R∗
term = 8ηLt /π (5)
R∗ for a bifurcation sub-tree with (non-terminal)
branch i as its root is given by [20]
R∗
i = 8ηLi
π +
￿ ￿rle f t /r i
￿ 4
R ∗
le f t
+
￿rright /ri
￿ 4
R∗
right
￿ −1
(6)
2 This assumption avoids having varying terminal flows and sub-
sequently avoids the knapsack combinatorial optimization problem of
choosing candidates.
3 We assume a cut-off in the resolution of our model and hence
ignore the capillary loops bringing blood back to the heart. With this
assumption we assign a resistance even to the terminal branches of
our model.
2
As we will see later, the reduced resistance is used
for calculating the radii of branches. The pressure drop
along a branch i is calculated as
∆Pi = Q i Ri (7)
Each terminal node is assumed to have the same ter-
minal pressure, which means the pressure drop from the
perfusion point to any terminal node must be the same.
Since the flow at each terminal node is the same and
likewise the terminal pressure, then the resistance from
the perfusion point to any terminal node must also be
the same.
3. Vascular Tree Generation
3.1. Overview
The tree generation is performed by iteratively grow-
ing a vascular structure based on a user-defined (possi-
bly spatially-varying) oxygen demand map (section 3.2)
while enforcing the physical constraints (section 2). At
a high level (Figure 1), during each iteration, a candi-
date terminal node is first chosen according to the oxy-
gen demand map. Then an existing branch is bifurcated
to supply this terminal node. The choice of the branch to
bifurcate and the location of the bifurcation point along
the branch is chosen in an optimal way as we explain
later. The oxygen supply map is then updated accord-
ingly, and a new terminal node is selected, and so on.
After the tree has completed its growth, the final radii of
the tree branches are calculated according to the afore-
mentioned physical flow and radii constraints.
3.2. Oxygen Demand Map
An oxygen demand map ODM(x, y, z) : Ω ⊂ R3 →
[0, 1] is a 3D scalar volume that covers the entire per-
fusion volume Ω, with values ranging from 0 for ‘no
demand’ to 1 for maximum demand for oxygen. ODM
is provided as an input to the algorithm. A simple case
is to have a constant (homogeneous) oxygen demand
map. The steps in Section 3.4-3.10 are then repeated
to iteratively construct tree branches that connect to ter-
minal nodes, until a user-defined number N of accepted
terminal nodes is reached.
3.3. Perforation and Terminal Pressure
A tree trunk node position, or perforation point, p =
(px , py , p z ) must be provided to the algorithm. Altering
this value will change the initial location of the vascular
structure. The perforation pressure is the pressure of the
vascular structure at the perforation point, i.e. Pper f =
P(p). Since the flow is conserved (section 2), any in-
crease in pressure requires a decrease in volume, which
in turn means that as the perforation pressure increases,
the radii of the branches decrease, and vice versa. The
terminal pressure Pterm is the value of the pressure at
any terminal node t i = (t x ,t y ,tz ), i.e. Pterm = P(t i ), for
any i = 1, 2, . . . , N. Note that Pterm ≤ Pper f must be en-
sured. Pper f and Pterm are used for calculating the radius
of the root branch, which is then used to calculate the
radii of all other branches (Section 3.8).
3.4. Selecting Terminal Nodes
A terminal node position is randomly selected from
the perfusion volume such that the likelihood (probabil-
ity) of selecting this node is proportional to the value
of the ODM at the location of that node. The Mersenne
Twister algorithm is used for the selection of a candidate
terminal node [24]. The selected node is then used as a
candidate for being attached to the tree. The candidate
node is rejected, if all paths from the tree to the node
pass through regions of zero demand, or if the node is
within a certain user-specified distance, D B , to any ex-
isting branch.
3.5. Selecting a Branch to Supply a Terminal Node
If no branches exist yet in the tree then a branch is
created from the tree trunk node position p to the first
terminal node t1 . Otherwise, each existing branch in the
tree is temporarily connected to the candidate terminal
node and each such solution is evaluated. Preference is
given to trees that minimize the objective function
∑∀ j L μ
j r λ
j (8)
where j is an index over all branches in the tree. In-
creasing λ will favour the configurations where the radii
are smallest (and vice versa), while increasing μ will fa-
vor configurations with shorter branches. If μ = 1 and
λ = 2, then the objective function is proportional to the
volume ∑∀ j L j πr 2
j , i.e. union of cylindrical branches.
According to [20], the branches closest to the can-
didate terminal node are most likely to be chosen as the
minimizers of (8), with the 1 st closest being chosen 60%
of the time, dropping down to ≤ 1% for the 10th clos-
est. In our work, we rely on this conclusion and examine
only the k closest branches (k is user-specified). The op-
timal branch which results in the minimal value of the
objective function is chosen and that connection is made
permanent. If every branch examined was rejected (i.e.
all branches pass through a 0 demand region), then the
terminal node is rejected and a new one is chosen (Sec-
tion 3.4).

3.6. Branch Bifurcation Points
With an accepted terminal node i new , the chosen
branch to bifurcate, originally connecting nodes i per f to
iold and denoted i per f ⇒ iold , is now split into two parts
via a new point i bi f (Figure 2). The location of i bi f is
chosen arbitrarily midway at this stage and will be up-
dated later (Section 3.9). This results in two branches
i per f ⇒ ibi f and ibi f ⇒ iold , and a newly created branch
i bi f ⇒ i new , i.e. a Y junction is formed.
Figure 2: Introducing a bifurcating branch.
3.7. Updating the Branches’ Reduced Resistance and
Flow
After a terminal node inew has been connected to the
vascular structure at ibi f , the reduced resistance and flow
are updated. The new branch i bi f ⇒ inew is assigned
a flow value of Qterm . To satisfy the constraint in (1),
Qterm is added to all the ancestor branches of ibi f ⇒ i new ,
stopping at the root, up to which the flow accumulates
to Q per f = NQterm (agreeing with (2)). The reduced re-
sistance R∗ of ibi f ⇒ inew is calculated using (5) as it
is initially connected to a terminal node. Then, recur-
sively, R∗
i of the parent branch is updated using (6) until
the reduced resistance of the root R∗
per f has been calcu-
lated.
3.8. Updating the Branch Radii
The radius of a branch is calculated by first determin-
ing the fraction of the branch’s radius to its parent’s ra-
dius, and then multiplying the parent radius by the cal-
culated fraction. In order to calculate the radii of all
branches of the tree, the radius of the root-most (per-
foration) branch is first calculated, then the radii of its
two children are calculated, then the radii of the chil-
dren’s children, and so on, until reaching the terminal
4
branches. The perforation radius is calculated by divid-
ing (4) by (5) to obtain
r per f =
￿ R∗
per f
R per f
￿ 1
4
(9)
Using (7) to calculate R per f , we re-write (9) as
r per f =
￿ Q per f R∗
per f
Pper f − Pterm
￿1/4
(10)
and calculate R ∗
per f from (5). Once the radius of the
root branch is calculated, the radii of the left and right
child branches are calculated as follows. Dividing (3)
by r γ
le f t and re-arranging the terms, we calculate the
fraction f le f t (and similarly for f right ) as
f le f t = rle f t
r per f
=
￿
1 +
￿ rright
rle f t
￿ γ ￿−1/γ
(11)
rle f t is then obtained by multiplying f le f t by r per f in
(10). Note that the ratio rright /r le f t must be known in
order to calculate f le f t (and similarly for f right ). This
ratio is obtained by equating ∆Ple f t to ∆Pright (both cal-
culated from(7)) and substituting Rle f t by R∗
le f t /r 4
le f t to
obtain
rle f t
r right
=
￿ Q le f t R∗
le f t
Q right R∗
right
￿ 1
4
(12)
With this rright /r le f t ratio in hand, f le f t and f right are
calculated and multiplied by r per f to obtain r le f t and
rright , respectively. The procedure is repeated to update
the flow and radii for subsequent branch generations.
3.9. Optimizing the Bifurcation Location
Once the radii and flow values have been updated,
the location of the bifurcation point, i bi f , is translated
along the branch to minimize the aforementioned ob-
jective function in (2). Once ibi f is moved, the entire
tree must be updated again. This process is repeated un-
til convergence. Any location of i bi f is rejected if either
the branch ibi f ⇒ i new , i per f ⇒ ibi f , or i bi f ⇒ i old pass
through a region of zero oxygen demand. If all possible
ibi f positions are rejected then the branch is rejected.
3.10. Updating the Demand Map to Reflect Existing
Supply
Since branches created in the volume supply nutrients
to regions in the vicinity of terminal nodes perfused by
these branches, the demand for nutrients in nearby re-
gions must be lowered. The positions in the volume
close to the position of a perfused terminal node are as-
sumed to draw from this supply through the arteriolar
networks, and hence the value of the oxygen demand
map ODM at these nearby voxel locations is updated as
ODM (v) ←
￿ ODM (v) d (v,t) > D T
ODM (v) w (d (v,t)) d (v,t) ≤ D T
￿
(13)
where d(v,t) is the Euclidean distance between the
voxel position v and the terminal node position t and
w(d(v,t)) ∈ [0, 1] is a monotonically increasing func-
tion (e.g. polynomial or exponential). The equation
essentially states that: The demand at locations far
away from the perfused nodes (d(v,t) > treshold D T )
is not affected, whereas the demand at nearby locations
(d(v,t) ≤ D T ) is decreased via the weighting by w, and
the farther these locations are to the perfused terminal
node the smaller the drop in demand.
3.11. Graph-based Modeling of the Vasculature
During the iterations of the algorithm, an attributed
graph data structure G (V , E ) is constructed to describe
the hierarchy and connectivity of the branches (parent-
child relationships). V is the set of vertices vi repre-
senting the bifurcation points of the vascular tree and
E is the set of edges ei representing the branches. Ver-
tex and edge attributes are also encoded in the graph to
further capture the properties of the vasculature. Asso-
ciated with each v i ∈ V are the 3D coordinates of the
spatial location of the branching point. Associated with
each e i ∈ E are the length, radius, and flow in the branch
represented by e i , and indices to the two bifurcation or
terminal nodes it connects. The attributed graph is for-
malized using the Graph eXchange Language (GXL) 4 ,
an open standard exchange format for graphs [25], ad-
hering to the eXtensible Markup Language (XML) and
constrained by a Document Type Definition (DTD). Our
implementation is also capable of exporting the tree in
the DOT language5 , a plain text graph description lan-
guage, which can be imported into different software.
We use the Graph Visualization software, Graphviz6 , to
display the resulting graphs
